Hello Friends
In this video we will learn about the merge sort
so merge
sort is an efficient sorting algorithm which uses that divide
and conquer approach
But before understanding merge sort let us understand how to
sort two sorted arrays
This concept is very helpful and also crucial while learning
the merge sort algorithm so given two sorted array
A and B both of size five let us
combine or merge these two array into one sorted array
So allocate one additional array of size 10 to store
the result here A and B are sorted individually we have
to merge A and B in sorted order
So what should we do Since the two arrays are
sorted the smallest element of a will be its first
element and similarly this smallest element of b will be
its first element
So to get the smallest number of both the arrays
we only need to compare the first element of both
arrays and the one that is smaller will be the
minimum of all these numbers
So we can use two variables I and J for
this and here the first element of a is five
and first element of b is ten referred by i and j and
which one is smaller here it is five referred by i
So that must be the minimum among all these numbers
so added to the new array
And since it is added we can move I to
the next element
So now I points to the second element of a
Now we do not need to consider five because it
is already added to the new array
Now the minimum element of a will be the second
element and minimum element of b is still it's first
one
So now to keep the minimum value of remaining numbers
again compare I and J
That is 20 and 10 and 10 is smaller here
That means 10 is the minimum value in the remaining
numbers so added to the new array Now move J
to the next element
So now comapre these two and we have 20 less
than 25 So add 20 to the new array and
move I to the next element again
Repeat the process compared the minimum elements of array of
A and B and here 25 is less than 30
So add 25 to the new array Now move J
to the next element now compared 30 and 28 again
28 is smaller so added to the new array now compared
30 and 40
And here 30 is the smaller one so added to
the new array
Next we have to compare 40 and 45 and which one is smaller
Here it is 40
So added to the new array
Now compare 45 42 here 42 is the smaller one
So 42 is added to the new array now one
array is completed
Now we don't need any more comparisons but we only
need to copy the remaining part of the array because
it is already in sorted order
So just copy the remaining part to the new
array
So now we got the new merged sorted array C
So now we know how to merge and sort two
separate sorted arrays In the next video we will apply this concept and understand how merge sort works.